
--- PAGE 1 ---
AGENTIC AI - AUTONOMOUS FINANCIAL RESEARCH
AGENT WITH MULTI-SOURCE SYNTHESIS
Category: AI Application Technology | Agentic AI Engineer
Timeline: 15 Days | AI-Accelerated Innovation & Research Project
Target: Undergraduate / MBA / Engineering Students
TASK:
To design and build a fully autonomous AI agent that replicates the research workflow of a junior
financial analyst by receiving a research query, independently formulating a research plan, gathering
data from multiple sources including SEC EDGAR filings, financial data APIs, earnings call transcripts,
news feeds, and web search, and synthesizing all findings into a structured, professional investment
research report - all without step-by-step human guidance. The agent must implement a ReAct or
Plan-and-Execute reasoning loop, a tool registry with a minimum of 10 tools, a three-layer memory
system (short-term, long-term via vector database, and episodic), a multi-source synthesis engine capable
of resolving conflicting data, comprehensive error handling with fallback chains, and an evaluation
framework covering 20+ quality metrics - validated across 8 progressive research challenges of
increasing difficulty.
PART A: TRAINING MATERIAL & LEARNING RESOURCES
PART B: GAMIFIED SIMULATION BUSINESS CONCEPT
PART C: CASE STUDIES & REAL-WORLD APPLICATIONS
PART D: 15-DAY PROJECT METHODOLOGY & DELIVERABLES
PART E: NO-CODE TOOLS & PLATFORMS GUIDE
PART F: SUBMISSION PROTOCOL
Important Note:
This Project is designed, developed, and administered solely by Zetheta Algorithms Private Limited ("Zetheta")
for the purpose of assessing candidates, students, or event participants on behalf of engaging employers,
institutes, or event organisers. Completion of this Project does not guarantee employment, academic outcomes,
awards, or any other result - all such decisions remain at the sole discretion of the respective engaging party.
Zetheta may use AI-assisted tools to evaluate submissions; such outputs are indicative in nature and may be
inaccurate or incomplete. By participating, you consent to your performance data, scores, and submissions
being shared with relevant engaging parties for assessment and decision-making purposes.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 1
--- PAGE 2 ---
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This project positions students as Agentic AI Engineers at a fictional quantitative research firm -
QuantumEdge Research - requiring them to master the convergence of large language model
reasoning, financial data engineering, and autonomous system design. Unlike traditional AI projects
that operate within a single domain, this project demands simultaneous fluency in LLM orchestration,
RAG pipeline architecture, and vector database design on one side, and SEC regulatory filings,
earnings analysis, financial ratio computation, and investment research methodology on the other.
The core challenge students must solve: How can an AI system replace the junior analyst workflow -
receiving a research query, formulating a plan, gathering data from disparate sources, resolving
conflicting information, and producing a professional-grade investment research report - entirely
without step-by-step human guidance? The answer lies in a purpose-built autonomous agent
architecture that orchestrates a registry of 10+ tools through a ReAct or Plan-and-Execute reasoning
loop, grounds every output in retrieved source documents through a multi-stage RAG pipeline, and
implements a three-layer memory system combining short-term context management, long-term
vector storage, and episodic strategy memory.
Students will build ARA-1 - an Autonomous Research Agent validated across eight progressive
research challenges of increasing complexity, from a basic company profile to a full investment report
under simulated tool failures. The agent must handle ambiguous queries, resolve contradictory data
across sources using a reliability hierarchy, recover gracefully from API failures through fallback
chains, and score above 70% tool efficiency and below 2% hallucination rate - benchmarked against
human analyst research reports.
The global investment research market is valued at over $8 billion annually, while financial
institutions spend an estimated $50+ billion per year on junior analyst labour performing largely
repeatable, data-intensive research tasks. Yet the vast majority of this workflow remains manual, slow,
and prone to human error. This project closes this intelligence gap - equipping students to build the
next generation of autonomous research infrastructure, with architecture patterns directly applicable to
hedge funds, investment banks, and financial data platforms seeking to deploy production-grade
agentic AI systems.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 2
--- PAGE 3 ---
PART A: TRAINING MATERIAL & LEARNING RESOURCES
SECTION A1: INTRODUCTION TO AGENTIC AI SYSTEMS
A1.1 What Is An AI Agent?
Definition And Core Concept:
An AI agent is a software system that perceives its environment through sensors or data inputs,
reasons about that information using one or more large language models (LLMs), and takes
autonomous action through tool invocation to achieve a specified goal. Unlike traditional chatbots that
respond to single prompts in isolation, an agent maintains state across multiple reasoning steps,
selects tools dynamically based on intermediate results, and self-corrects when it detects errors or
inconsistencies in its output.
In the context of financial research, an AI agent replaces or augments the junior analyst workflow. A
human junior analyst at an investment bank typically receives a research assignment, formulates a
research plan, gathers data from multiple sources (Bloomberg terminal, SEC EDGAR filings, earnings
call transcripts, industry reports, news feeds), synthesizes findings, identifies patterns and anomalies,
and produces a structured research report. An agentic AI system mirrors each of these steps
programmatically, with the LLM serving as the reasoning engine that decides what information to
gather next and how to interpret it.
Key Characteristics Of AI Agents:
● Autonomy: The agent operates without step-by-step human guidance once given an initial goal
or query. It decides which tools to invoke, in what order, and how to interpret results.
● Reactivity: The agent responds to changes in its environment. If a tool returns unexpected
results, the agent adjusts its plan rather than failing silently.
● Proactivity: The agent anticipates information needs. If researching a pharmaceutical
company, it proactively checks FDA approval databases even if not explicitly instructed.
● Social ability: In multi-agent architectures, agents communicate with other agents, delegate
sub-tasks, and aggregate findings from specialist agents.
● Memory: The agent maintains both short-term memory (current research session context) and
long-term memory (accumulated knowledge from previous research tasks stored in a vector
database).
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 3
--- PAGE 4 ---
A1.2 The Evolution From Chatbots To Agents
Generation 1: Rule-Based Systems (Pre-2020):
Early financial AI systems were deterministic. They followed pre-programmed decision trees: if a
stock price dropped more than 5% in a day, generate an alert. If a company filed a 10-K with a going
concern opinion, flag it as high risk. These systems were brittle because they could not handle
scenarios outside their programmed rules. A novel type of risk disclosure in an SEC filing, for
example, would pass through undetected because no rule existed to catch it.
Generation 2: Llm-Powered Chatbots (2022-2023):
The release of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 enabled natural language interaction with financial data. Users
could ask questions like 'What were Apple's revenue drivers in Q3 2023?' and receive coherent
answers. However, these systems had critical limitations: they relied entirely on training data (no
real-time information), they could not verify their own outputs against authoritative sources, and they
hallucinated confidently when they lacked information. A chatbot might fabricate a quarterly revenue
figure that sounded plausible but was entirely wrong.
Generation 3: Agentic AI Systems (2024-Present):
Agentic systems address these limitations by giving the LLM the ability to use tools. Instead of
guessing Apple's Q3 revenue, the agent calls a financial data API to retrieve the exact figure. Instead
of relying on training data for recent news, the agent performs a web search. The LLM's role shifts
from being the source of information to being the reasoning engine that orchestrates information
retrieval and synthesis. This is the paradigm you will build in this project.
A1.3 The React Framework
Reasoning And Acting:
The ReAct (Reasoning + Acting) framework, introduced by Yao et al. (2022), is the foundational
paradigm for most agentic AI systems. In ReAct, the agent alternates between two modes:
1. Thought: The agent reasons about the current state of its research, what information it has
gathered so far, what information is missing, and what tool to invoke next. This reasoning step
is generated by the LLM and is visible in the agent's trace log.
2. Action: Based on its reasoning, the agent selects and invokes a tool with specific parameters.
For example: Action: search_sec_filings(ticker='AAPL', filing_type='10-K', year=2023).
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 4
--- PAGE 5 ---
Observation: The tool returns results, which the agent incorporates into its context. The agent then
generates another Thought step to interpret the results and decide what to do next.
This Thought-Action-Observation loop continues until the agent determines it has gathered sufficient
information to produce its final output, or until it reaches a maximum iteration limit (a safety
mechanism to prevent infinite loops).
React Example In Financial Research:
User Query: 'Prepare a risk assessment for Tesla Inc.'
Thought 1: I need to assess Tesla's risk profile. I should start by
retrieving their most recent 10-K filing to understand their
disclosed risk factors.
Action 1: search_sec_filings(ticker='TSLA', filing_type='10-K',
year=2024)
Observation 1: [Returns 10-K filing with 42 risk factors listed]
Thought 2: I have the disclosed risk factors. Now I need recent
news to identify emerging risks not yet captured in filings.
Action 2: web_search('Tesla risks challenges 2024 2025')
Observation 2: [Returns 10 news articles about supply chain,
regulatory, and competition risks]
Thought 3: I should also check analyst sentiment from recent
earnings calls to see how management addresses these risks.
Action 3: get_earnings_transcript(ticker='TSLA', quarter='Q3',
year=2024)
Observation 3: [Returns transcript with Q&A section]
Thought 4: I now have three data sources. Let me cross-reference
the disclosed risks with news and management commentary to
produce a comprehensive risk assessment.
Action 4: generate_report(template='risk_assessment',
sources=[filing, news, transcript])
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 5
--- PAGE 6 ---
A1.4 Plan-And-Execute Architecture
Separating Planning From Execution:
An alternative to ReAct is the Plan-and-Execute pattern, where the agent first creates a complete
research plan before taking any actions. This approach is often more efficient for complex, multi-step
research tasks because it reduces redundant tool calls and provides a clear roadmap that can be
reviewed before execution begins.
In Plan-and-Execute, the Planner LLM generates a structured plan with numbered steps, expected
outputs for each step, and dependencies between steps. The Executor then works through the plan step
by step, updating the plan if intermediate results reveal the need for additional research or if a planned
step becomes unnecessary.
Plan-And-Execute Example:
User Query: 'Compare the competitive positions of JPMorgan,
Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley in investment banking.'
PLAN:
Step 1: Retrieve latest 10-K filings for JPM, GS, MS
Step 2: Extract revenue breakdown by business segment
Step 3: Get league table rankings for M&A and ECM
Step 4: Analyze earnings call transcripts for strategic priorities
Step 5: Search news for recent deals and market share shifts
Step 6: Calculate key financial ratios (ROE, efficiency ratio)
Step 7: Synthesize into comparative analysis report
The advantage of this approach is visibility: a human reviewer can inspect the plan before execution
and suggest modifications. The disadvantage is rigidity: if Step 1 reveals that Morgan Stanley has
restructured its segments, the original plan may need significant revision.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 6
--- PAGE 7 ---
SECTION A2: TOOL ORCHESTRATION AND REGISTRY DESIGN
A2.1 What Is A Tool In An Agentic System?
Tool Definition:
In the agentic AI paradigm, a 'tool' is any external capability that the agent can invoke to interact with
the world beyond its own language model. Tools bridge the gap between the LLM's reasoning ability
and the real-world data and systems it needs to access. Each tool is defined by a name, a description
(which the LLM reads to decide when to use it), an input schema (specifying required and optional
parameters with their types), and an output schema (defining the structure of returned data).
The quality of tool definitions directly impacts agent performance. A vaguely described tool will be
invoked inappropriately; an overly restrictive description will cause the agent to miss opportunities to
use it. Writing effective tool descriptions is itself a form of prompt engineering.
A2.2 The Tool Registry
Registry Architecture:
The tool registry is the central catalog of all tools available to the agent. It serves three purposes: (1) it
provides the LLM with the metadata it needs to select appropriate tools during the Thought step, (2) it
manages the execution layer that routes tool calls to the correct API endpoints or functions, and (3) it
handles authentication, rate limiting, error handling, and result caching.
Your agent must implement a minimum of 10 tools. Below is the reference tool registry with detailed
specifications for each tool:
Tool Name Description Input Schema Output
sec_filing_search Retrieves SEC filings ticker: str, Filing text, filing
(10-K, 10-Q, 8-K, DEF filing_type: str, year: date, accession
14A) from EDGAR for int (optional) number
a given company ticker
and filing type
web_search Performs web search for query: str, List of URL, title,
current news, analysis, num_results: int snippet tuples
and commentary about a (default 10),
company or financial date_range: str
topic (optional)
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 7
--- PAGE 8 ---
earnings_transcript Retrieves earnings call ticker: str, quarter: str Full transcript text
transcript for a specific (Q1-Q4), year: int with speaker labels
company, quarter, and
year
financial_data_api Retrieves structured ticker: str, JSON of financial
financial data including statement_type: str, statement data
income statement, period: str
balance sheet, cash (annual/quarterly),
flow, and key ratios years: int
news_sentiment Analyzes sentiment of query: str, Sentiment scores,
recent news articles num_articles: int, article summaries,
about a company or lookback_days: int overall sentiment
topic using NLP
vector_db_search Searches the agent's query: str, top_k: int, Relevant document
long-term memory filter: dict (optional) chunks with
(vector database) for similarity scores
previously researched
information
vector_db_store Stores new research content: str, Storage confirmation
findings in the agent's metadata: dict with document ID
long-term memory for (ticker, date,
future retrieval source_type)
company_profile Retrieves basic ticker: str Structured company
company information profile JSON
including sector,
industry, market cap,
executives, and
description
peer_comparison Identifies peer ticker: str, Peer comparison
companies and retrieves num_peers: int, matrix with rankings
comparative financial metrics: list[str]
metrics
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 8
--- PAGE 9 ---
report_generator Formats researched data template: str, Formatted research
into a structured sections: dict, report in markdown
investment research sources: list
report following a
specified template
fact_checker Cross-references a claim: str, sources: Verification status,
specific claim against list[str] (optional) supporting evidence,
multiple authoritative confidence score
sources to verify
accuracy
calculation_engine Performs financial calculation_type: str, Calculation result
calculations including inputs: dict with intermediate
DCF, ratios, growth steps
rates, and statistical
analysis
A2.3 Tool Selection Logic
How The Agent Chooses Tools:
The LLM selects tools based on a combination of the tool descriptions in the registry and the current
state of the research task. Tool selection is implemented through the system prompt, which includes
the full tool registry with descriptions. When the LLM generates a Thought step, it evaluates which
tool would most efficiently provide the information it needs next.
Effective tool selection requires the agent to consider: (1) what information is already available in its
current context, (2) what information is still missing, (3) which tool is most likely to provide that
information, (4) whether the tool has rate limits or cost implications that should influence the order of
operations, and (5) whether the information could be obtained from the agent's long-term memory
(vector database) rather than making an external API call.
Tool Selection Anti-Patterns:
● Redundant calls: Invoking web_search for information already available in a retrieved SEC
filing. The agent should check existing context before making new tool calls.
● Wrong granularity: Using financial_data_api to get a single ratio when a full financial
statement retrieval would provide multiple needed data points in one call.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 9
--- PAGE 10 ---
● Missing verification: Accepting a single source's data without cross-referencing. The agent
should invoke fact_checker for critical numerical claims.
● Ignoring memory: Performing a full research cycle for a company the agent has already
researched recently. The vector_db_search tool should be checked first.
● Over-reliance on web search: Using web_search for structured data that is more accurately
available from financial_data_api or sec_filing_search.
A2.4 Tool Schema Design Principles
Writing Effective Tool Schemas:
Each tool schema must follow the OpenAI function calling specification (which is also used by
Anthropic's Claude tool use). The schema is a JSON object with the following required fields: name
(string, no spaces, descriptive), description (string, 1-3 sentences explaining when and why to use this
tool), parameters (JSON Schema object defining input types, required fields, and defaults).
Example: Well-Designed Tool Schema:
{
"name": "sec_filing_search",
"description": "Search and retrieve SEC EDGAR filings for a
publicly traded US company. Use this tool when you need
official regulatory disclosures including annual reports
(10-K), quarterly reports (10-Q), material event reports
(8-K), or proxy statements (DEF 14A). Returns the full
text of the filing.",
"parameters": {
"type": "object",
"properties": {
"ticker": {
"type": "string",
"description": "Stock ticker symbol (e.g., AAPL, MSFT)"
},
"filing_type": {
"type": "string",
"enum": ["10-K", "10-Q", "8-K", "DEF 14A"],
"description": "Type of SEC filing to retrieve"
},
"year": {
"type": "integer",
"description": "Filing year (defaults to most recent)"
}
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 10
--- PAGE 11 ---
},
"required": ["ticker", "filing_type"]
}
}
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 11
--- PAGE 12 ---
SECTION A3: MEMORY ARCHITECTURE FOR RESEARCH AGENTS
A3.1 Why Agents Need Memory
The Memory Imperative:
An AI agent without memory is like a junior analyst with amnesia: it produces the same research from
scratch every time, cannot learn from past mistakes, and cannot build upon previous findings.
Memory transforms an agent from a stateless tool executor into a knowledge-accumulating research
system that improves over time.
In financial research, memory is particularly critical because research is cumulative. An analyst
covering the technology sector builds an increasingly deep understanding of competitive dynamics,
management quality, and industry trends over months and years. Without memory, the agent would
need to re-discover these patterns every time it receives a new query.
A3.2 Three Types Of Agent Memory
Short-Term Memory (Working Memory):
Short-term memory is the agent's context window during a single research session. It contains the
original user query, all Thought-Action-Observation traces generated so far, and any intermediate
results. This memory is managed by the LLM's context window and is discarded when the session
ends. The primary challenge with short-term memory is context window limitations: a single research
session may generate more text than the LLM can hold in its context. Strategies for managing this
include summarization of earlier steps, selective retention of key findings, and chunking of large tool
outputs.
Long-Term Memory (Semantic Memory):
Long-term memory persists across research sessions and is typically implemented using a vector
database such as Pinecone, Weaviate, Chroma, or Qdrant. When the agent completes a research task,
key findings are embedded using a text embedding model (such as OpenAI's text-embedding-3-small
or Cohere's embed-v3) and stored in the vector database with metadata including the company ticker,
research date, source type, and confidence level. Before starting a new research task, the agent queries
this memory to retrieve relevant past findings.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 12
--- PAGE 13 ---
Episodic Memory (Experience Memory):
Episodic memory records the agent's past experiences at the process level: which research strategies
worked well, which tools produced the best results for specific types of queries, which error patterns
the agent encountered, and how it recovered. This memory enables the agent to improve its planning
over time. For example, if the agent has previously learned that earnings call transcripts are the best
source for understanding management's forward-looking strategy, it will prioritize transcript retrieval
earlier in its research plan for similar future queries.
A3.3 Vector Database Design For Financial Research
Schema Design:
The vector database schema must accommodate the diverse types of financial information the agent
stores. Each record in the database should contain the following fields:
Field Type Description Example
id string Unique identifier for the tsla-10k-2024-risk-factors-001
record
content string The text content to be Tesla faces supply chain risks...
embedded
embedding vector Dense vector [0.012, -0.045, 0.089, ...]
representation of content
ticker string Company ticker symbol TSLA
source_type string Type of source document 10-K, earnings_call, news,
analysis
date datetime Date of the source 2024-10-15T00:00:00Z
information
confidence float Agent's confidence in the 0.92
information (0-1)
researcher_session string Session ID that produced session-2024-10-15-001
this record
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 13
--- PAGE 14 ---
verified boolean Whether fact-checked true
against multiple sources
Chunking Strategy:
Financial documents must be intelligently chunked before embedding. Naive chunking (splitting at
fixed character counts) destroys the semantic coherence of financial information. Instead, use
semantic chunking that respects document structure:
● SEC Filings: Chunk by section (Risk Factors, MD&A, Financial Statements) and by
individual risk factor or discussion topic within sections.
● Earnings Transcripts: Chunk by speaker turn, with each Q&A pair kept as a single chunk to
preserve the context of analyst questions and management responses.
● News Articles: Chunk by paragraph, with the headline and first paragraph always included as
context in every chunk from the same article.
● Financial Statements: Store as structured JSON rather than embedding as text. Use metadata
filtering rather than semantic search for numerical data retrieval.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 14
--- PAGE 15 ---
SECTION A4: ERROR HANDLING AND GRACEFUL DEGRADATION
A4.1 Why Error Handling Is Critical In Financial AI
The Cost Of Failure:
In financial research, errors can have significant real-world consequences. An agent that produces a
research report containing incorrect data, fabricated citations, or flawed analysis could lead to poor
investment decisions. Unlike a chatbot conversation where an error is merely inconvenient, a flawed
financial research report could result in material financial losses. Therefore, error handling in a
financial research agent is not an afterthought but a core architectural requirement.
A4.2 Categories Of Agent Errors
Tool Execution Errors:
● API unavailability: The SEC EDGAR API is down for maintenance, the financial data
provider is experiencing an outage, or the web search service returns HTTP 503.
● Rate limiting: The agent exceeds the allowed number of API calls per minute or per day.
Financial data APIs typically have strict rate limits.
● Authentication failures: API keys have expired, been revoked, or are missing from the
environment configuration.
● Malformed responses: A tool returns data in an unexpected format, with missing fields, or
with corrupted content.
● Timeout: A tool call takes longer than the configured timeout period, potentially due to large
document retrieval or slow network conditions.
Reasoning Errors:
● Hallucination: The LLM generates financial data, company names, or market events that do
not exist. This is the most dangerous error type in financial research.
● Logical inconsistency: The agent's reasoning contradicts information it has already gathered.
For example, stating a company is profitable while its retrieved financial statements show net
losses.
● Premature conclusion: The agent generates its final report before gathering sufficient
information, typically because it misinterprets partial results as complete.
● Circular reasoning: The agent repeatedly invokes the same tools with the same parameters,
expecting different results.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 15
--- PAGE 16 ---
Data Quality Errors:
● Stale data: Using cached financial data from a previous quarter when current data is available.
● Conflicting sources: Different data sources report different figures for the same metric (for
example, revenue figures from a financial API may not match those in the 10-K due to
restatements).
● Misattribution: The agent correctly retrieves data but attributes it to the wrong company or
time period.
● Unit confusion: Mixing millions and billions, confusing percentages with basis points, or
misinterpreting currency denominations.
A4.3 Error Handling Strategies
Retry With Exponential Backoff:
For transient errors (API timeouts, rate limits, temporary unavailability), the agent should implement
retry logic with exponential backoff. The initial retry delay should be 1 second, doubling with each
subsequent attempt up to a maximum of 5 retries. Each retry should include a jitter component
(random delay of 0-500ms) to prevent thundering herd problems when multiple agent instances hit the
same API.
Fallback Tool Chains:
For each primary tool, define one or more fallback tools that can provide similar (if less precise)
information. The fallback chain for financial data might be: (1) primary financial data API, (2) SEC
filing extraction with parsing, (3) web search for financial summary sites, (4) vector database for
previously stored data. The agent should transparently log when it uses a fallback and note the
reduced confidence in its output.
Fact Verification Pipeline:
Every numerical claim in the agent's output should pass through a fact verification step. The
verification pipeline works as follows: (1) extract all numerical claims from the draft report, (2) for
each claim, identify the source tool and raw data, (3) cross-reference against at least one independent
source, (4) flag any claim where sources disagree by more than 5% for manual review, (5) attach
confidence scores to each claim in the final report.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 16
--- PAGE 17 ---
Graceful Degradation Protocol:
When errors cannot be resolved, the agent must degrade gracefully rather than fail silently. Graceful
degradation means: (1) clearly stating in the report which sections could not be completed and why,
(2) providing the best available information from tools that did work, (3) suggesting alternative
approaches the user could take to obtain the missing information, (4) never fabricating data to fill
gaps left by failed tool calls.
Important: Error Detection Exercise:
NOTE TO INTERN: This document contains exactly 7 deliberate factual or logical errors embedded
throughout Parts A through E. Identifying these errors is part of your assessment. Each correctly
identified error with a proper explanation earns bonus points. Errors range from incorrect formulas,
wrong API specifications, flawed logic in code examples, to factual inaccuracies about financial
concepts. You must document each error you find in your submission's ERROR_LOG.md file.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 17
--- PAGE 18 ---
SECTION A5: EVALUATION FRAMEWORK DESIGN
A5.1 Why Evaluation Is Hard For Research Agents
The Evaluation Challenge:
Evaluating an autonomous research agent is fundamentally harder than evaluating a classification
model or a recommendation system. Research quality is multi-dimensional: a report can be factually
accurate but poorly structured, comprehensive but incoherent, well-written but missing critical risks.
Furthermore, there is rarely a single 'correct' research output for a given query. Two expert analysts
researching the same company may produce substantially different reports, both of high quality,
because they prioritize different aspects of the analysis.
A5.2 Quality Metrics Framework (20+ Metrics)
Category 1: Factual Accuracy (5 Metrics):
● FA-1: Numerical Accuracy Rate – Percentage of numerical claims in the report that match
authoritative sources. Target: >98%.
● FA-2: Citation Accuracy – Percentage of cited sources that are real, accessible, and actually
support the claims attributed to them. Target: 100%.
● FA-3: Temporal Accuracy – Whether the report correctly identifies the time periods for all
data points (e.g., distinguishing Q3 2024 data from Q3 2023). Target: 100%.
● FA-4: Entity Accuracy – Whether all company names, executive names, product names, and
ticker symbols are correct. Target: 100%.
● FA-5: Hallucination Rate – Number of claims in the report that cannot be traced to any source
retrieved by the agent. Target: 0.
Category 2: Completeness (4 Metrics):
● CO-1: Section Coverage – Whether the report includes all sections specified in the template
(executive summary, financial analysis, risk assessment, competitive positioning, outlook).
Target: 100%.
● CO-2: Data Source Diversity – Number of distinct source types used (SEC filings, earnings
calls, news, financial data, industry reports). Target: >=4 source types.
● CO-3: Temporal Coverage – Whether the report covers historical trends (3-5 year horizon) in
addition to current data. Target: >=3 years.
● CO-4: Risk Factor Coverage – Percentage of material risk factors identified compared to the
company's own 10-K risk factor disclosures. Target: >=80%.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 18
--- PAGE 19 ---
Category 3: Analytical Depth (4 Metrics):
● AD-1: Insight Density – Number of non-obvious analytical observations per page of report
(observations that go beyond restating retrieved facts). Target: >=3 per page.
● AD-2: Cross-Source Synthesis – Number of instances where the report connects information
from multiple sources to derive a conclusion. Target: >=5 per report.
● AD-3: Quantitative Reasoning – Whether the report includes original calculations (growth
rates, margins, ratios) derived from retrieved data rather than simply quoting pre-computed
figures. Target: >=10 original calculations.
● AD-4: Forward-Looking Analysis – Whether the report includes reasoned projections or
scenario analyses based on the gathered data. Target: >=2 forward-looking sections.
Category 4: Coherence And Structure (4 Metrics):
● CS-1: Logical Flow – Whether the report's sections follow a logical progression and whether
conclusions follow from the presented evidence. Assessed by LLM judge.
● CS-2: Internal Consistency – Whether the report contains any self-contradictions (e.g.,
describing a company as 'rapidly growing' in one section and 'stagnating' in another). Target: 0
contradictions.
● CS-3: Executive Summary Quality – Whether the executive summary accurately captures the
key findings of the full report. Assessed by comparison.
● CS-4: Professional Formatting – Whether the report follows the specified template, uses
appropriate headers, includes charts or tables where appropriate, and meets length
requirements.
Category 5: Agent Behaviour (5 Metrics):
● AB-1: Tool Efficiency – Ratio of useful tool calls to total tool calls. A useful call is one whose
results are cited in the final report. Target: >=70%.
● AB-2: Error Recovery Rate – Percentage of tool errors that the agent successfully recovers
from using fallback strategies. Target: >=90%.
● AB-3: Planning Quality – Whether the agent's initial plan covers all necessary research steps
and whether plan revisions are reasonable. Assessed qualitatively.
● AB-4: Memory Utilization – Whether the agent checks and uses long-term memory before
making redundant external calls. Measured as the ratio of memory hits to total external API
calls (higher is better, target: >=0.3). Note: This metric is calculated as memory_hits
multiplied by total_api_calls.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 19
--- PAGE 20 ---
● AB-5: Latency – Total time from query receipt to report delivery. Target depends on report
complexity but should be <5 minutes for single-company analysis.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 20
--- PAGE 21 ---
SECTION A6: MULTI-SOURCE DATA SYNTHESIS
A6.1 The Synthesis Challenge
Why Synthesis Is The Hardest Part:
Gathering data from multiple sources is relatively straightforward; the real challenge is synthesizing
that data into a coherent narrative that adds analytical value beyond what any individual source
provides. Synthesis requires the agent to: (1) identify agreements and disagreements across sources,
(2) resolve conflicting data points by evaluating source reliability, (3) identify patterns that emerge
only when multiple data points are considered together, and (4) generate original analytical
observations that connect disparate pieces of information.
Consider this scenario: the agent has gathered data showing that a company's revenue grew 15%
year-over-year (from the 10-K), that management expressed confidence about continued growth on
the earnings call, but that three independent news articles report major customer contract losses. A
simple agent would present all three data points separately. A sophisticated agent would synthesize
them into an insight: the revenue growth is backward-looking and may not be sustainable given the
customer losses, and management's optimism may not be fully accounting for these developments.
A6.2 Source Reliability Hierarchy
Tiered Source Trustworthiness:
Not all sources are equally reliable, and the agent must weight information accordingly. The following
hierarchy should be implemented in the agent's synthesis logic:
1. Tier 1 (Highest Reliability): SEC filings (10-K, 10-Q) – legally mandated, audited, subject to
criminal penalties for misrepresentation.
2. Tier 2: Financial data APIs (Bloomberg, FactSet, Refinitiv) – curated from primary sources
with professional data quality controls.
3. Tier 3: Earnings call transcripts – direct management commentary but subject to spin and
selective disclosure.
4. Tier 4: Social media posts and anonymous forum discussions – crowd-sourced but unverified
and subject to manipulation.
5. Tier 5: Major news outlets (Reuters, Bloomberg News, Financial Times) – professional
journalism with editorial oversight but may contain errors or bias.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 21
--- PAGE 22 ---
A6.3 Conflict Resolution Protocol
When Sources Disagree:
The agent must implement a systematic protocol for resolving conflicting data:
1. Identify the conflict: Detect when two or more sources provide different values for the same
data point.
2. Assess source tiers: Determine the reliability tier of each conflicting source.
3. Check for temporal differences: Conflicting data may reflect different reporting periods rather
than actual disagreement.
4. Look for restatements: Companies sometimes restate historical financials, causing older sources
to show different figures than newer ones.
5. Apply the highest-tier rule: When conflicts cannot be resolved through temporal or restatement
analysis, prefer the highest-tier source.
6. Document the conflict: Always note in the report when conflicting data was encountered and
how it was resolved.
A6.4 Synthesis Techniques
Narrative Threading:
Narrative threading connects data points from different sources into a coherent story arc. The agent
constructs a chronological or thematic narrative that weaves together financial data, management
commentary, market conditions, and analyst perspectives. Each thread should have a clear thesis
supported by evidence from multiple sources.
Quantitative Triangulation:
For numerical data, the agent should triangulate by comparing the same metric from at least three
independent sources. If two of three sources agree, the agent can report with high confidence. If all
three disagree, the agent should report the range and explain possible reasons for the discrepancy.
Sentiment-Fact Alignment:
The agent should compare the sentiment expressed in qualitative sources (news, earnings calls) with
the facts presented in quantitative sources (financial statements). Misalignment between sentiment
and facts is itself an analytical finding. For example, if news sentiment is overwhelmingly positive but
financial metrics show deteriorating margins, this divergence is worth highlighting in the report.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 22
--- PAGE 23 ---
SECTION A7: LLM PROMPT ENGINEERING FOR RESEARCH AGENTS
A7.1 System Prompt Design
The Agent's Core Instructions:
The system prompt is the foundation of the agent's behaviour. It defines the agent's role, its
capabilities, its constraints, and its output format. For a financial research agent, the system prompt
must be carefully crafted to: (1) establish the agent as a financial research analyst with high standards
for accuracy, (2) provide clear instructions on when and how to use each tool, (3) define the output
format and quality expectations, (4) establish guardrails against hallucination and speculation, and (5)
set the tone and style appropriate for professional financial research.
System Prompt Structure:
ROLE: You are an autonomous financial research agent operating
at a quantitative research firm. You produce investment
research reports comparable to junior analyst output.
CAPABILITIES: You have access to the following tools:
[Tool registry injected here]
CONSTRAINTS:
1. Never fabricate data. If you cannot find information,
state that clearly in your report.
2. Always cite the source for every factual claim.
3. Cross-reference numerical data from at least 2 sources.
4. If sources conflict, report both values and explain.
5. Do not make investment recommendations or predictions.
6. Maximum 20 tool calls per research task.
OUTPUT FORMAT: Your final output must follow the research
report template with sections: Executive Summary, Company
Overview, Financial Analysis, Risk Assessment, Competitive
Position, and Research Methodology Notes.
A7.2 Prompt Patterns For Research Tasks
The Chain-Of-Verification Pattern:
This pattern forces the agent to verify its own outputs before presenting them. After generating a draft
section, the agent re-reads it and identifies any claims that need verification, then invokes tools to
verify those specific claims before finalizing the section.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 23
--- PAGE 24 ---
The Structured Output Pattern:
Financial research requires structured outputs with specific sections, tables, and data formats. The
prompt should include an explicit output schema that the agent must follow, including required
section headers, table formats for financial data, and citation formats.
The Self-Reflection Pattern:
After completing its research plan, the agent generates a self-assessment: What information gaps
remain? Which sections are weaker than others? Which claims have the lowest confidence? This
self-reflection can trigger additional research cycles to strengthen weak sections before finalizing the
report.
A7.3 Handling Ambiguous Queries
Query Disambiguation:
Financial research queries are often ambiguous. A query like 'Analyze Amazon' could mean analyze
Amazon the e-commerce company or Amazon the AWS cloud provider or Amazon as an employer or
Amazon as a logistics company. The agent must implement a query disambiguation step that: (1)
identifies the most likely interpretation based on context, (2) asks clarifying questions when
ambiguity cannot be resolved, (3) documents assumptions made when proceeding with a specific
interpretation.
Historical context matters for disambiguation. A query about 'bank stress tests' in 2007 likely refers to
the European Banking Authority's stress test programme, while the same query in 2009 likely refers
to the US Federal Reserve's Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) conducted in that year.
The agent should use temporal context to disambiguate. Note: The first US bank stress tests under
SCAP were conducted in 2007 following the Dodd-Frank Act.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 24
--- PAGE 25 ---
SECTION A8: RAG PIPELINE DESIGN FOR FINANCIAL RESEARCH
A8.1 Retrieval Augmented Generation Fundamentals
What Is RAG And Why It Matters:
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) is the architectural pattern that prevents your research agent
from hallucinating. Without RAG, the LLM generates responses purely from its training data, which
is static, potentially outdated, and lacks specific real-time financial information. With RAG, the agent
first retrieves relevant documents from external sources (SEC filings, financial databases, news
archives, its own vector database), then passes those documents as context to the LLM along with the
original query. The LLM generates its response grounded in the retrieved documents rather than
relying solely on parametric knowledge.
In the context of your autonomous financial research agent, RAG is not a single component but a
pipeline that spans multiple stages: query understanding, document retrieval, relevance filtering,
context assembly, generation, and post-generation verification. Each stage introduces potential failure
modes that must be addressed.
A8.2 The RAG Pipeline Stages
Stage 1: Query Transformation:
Raw user queries are often poor retrieval queries. A user asking 'Is Tesla a good investment?' needs to
be transformed into multiple specific retrieval queries: 'Tesla financial performance metrics 2023
2024', 'Tesla competitive risks electric vehicle market', 'Tesla revenue growth operating margins',
'Tesla analyst ratings price targets'. This transformation is performed by the LLM itself, using a query
decomposition prompt that generates 3-5 specific retrieval queries from a single user question.
Stage 2: Multi-Source Retrieval:
Unlike a typical RAG application that queries a single vector database, your financial research agent
performs retrieval across multiple sources simultaneously. The retrieval orchestrator dispatches
queries to: (1) the agent's long-term vector database for previously researched information, (2) the
SEC EDGAR API for regulatory filings, (3) financial data APIs for structured numerical data, (4)
news search APIs for recent coverage, and (5) earnings transcript databases for management
commentary. Each source returns results in a different format, requiring normalization before the
context assembly stage.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 25
--- PAGE 26 ---
Stage 3: Relevance Filtering And Re-Ranking:
Raw retrieval results often contain irrelevant or marginally relevant documents. A search for 'Tesla
operating margins' might return documents about Tesla's factory operations (which mention
'operating' and 'margin' but not in a financial context). The relevance filtering stage uses a
cross-encoder re-ranking model (such as Cohere's rerank-english-v3 or a locally-run cross-encoder
model from sentence-transformers) to score each retrieved document against the original query and
filter out documents below a relevance threshold.
For financial research, domain-specific re-ranking is especially important. A general-purpose
re-ranker may not understand that a paragraph discussing 'EBITDA margin expansion' is highly
relevant to a query about 'operating margins' even though the exact phrase does not match.
Stage 4: Context Assembly:
The context assembly stage determines how retrieved documents are presented to the LLM. This is a
critical design decision because the context window is limited and the order and formatting of context
directly impacts generation quality. Key considerations include:
● Source attribution: Each context chunk must be tagged with its source (filing type, date, URL)
so the LLM can generate proper citations.
● Recency weighting: More recent documents should appear earlier in the context to bias the
LLM toward current information.
● Diversity enforcement: Ensure context includes documents from multiple source types, not
just the highest-ranked results from a single source.
● Token budgeting: Allocate context window space proportionally: 40% for primary data
(filings, financials), 30% for supporting evidence (news, analyst reports), 20% for system
prompt and tool descriptions, 10% for generation space.
Stage 5: Grounded Generation:
The LLM generates its response using the assembled context. The system prompt must explicitly
instruct the LLM to: (1) only make claims supported by the provided context, (2) cite specific sources
for every factual claim, (3) acknowledge when the context is insufficient to answer part of the query,
and (4) distinguish between facts retrieved from sources and inferences drawn from those facts.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 26
--- PAGE 27 ---
Stage 6: Post-Generation Verification:
After generation, the verification stage checks every factual claim in the output against the retrieved
context. This is implemented as a separate LLM call with a verification prompt: 'Given the following
source documents [context] and the following generated text [output], identify any claims in the
output that are not supported by the source documents.' Claims that fail verification are either
corrected using the source data or flagged with a disclaimer.
A8.3 Advanced RAG Patterns
Iterative RAG (Self-RAG):
In standard RAG, retrieval happens once before generation. In iterative RAG, the agent interleaves
retrieval and generation: it generates a partial response, identifies information gaps in that partial
response, performs targeted retrieval to fill those gaps, and continues generation. This pattern is
particularly effective for complex research queries where the full scope of required information only
becomes apparent as the agent begins drafting its analysis.
Adaptive Retrieval:
Not every query requires the same retrieval strategy. A factual question ('What was Apple's Q3 2024
revenue?') needs precision-oriented retrieval from structured financial data. An analytical question
('What are the major competitive threats to Netflix?') needs breadth-oriented retrieval from diverse
sources. The agent should classify the query type and adapt its retrieval strategy accordingly. This is
known as adaptive retrieval and can be implemented by having the LLM generate a retrieval strategy
document before executing any retrieval.
Hypothetical Document Embedding (Hyde):
HyDE is a technique where the LLM first generates a hypothetical ideal answer to the query (without
any retrieval), then embeds that hypothetical answer and uses it as the retrieval query instead of the
original user question. The rationale is that a hypothetical answer is more semantically similar to the
actual answer documents in the vector database than the original question is. For financial research,
this can significantly improve retrieval quality for complex analytical queries.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 27
--- PAGE 28 ---
A8.4 RAG Failure Modes In Financial Research
Common Failure Modes And Mitigations:
● Retrieval failure (no relevant documents found): Mitigation – expand search terms, try
synonym queries, fall back to web search.
● Context poisoning (irrelevant documents ranked highly): Mitigation – implement strict
relevance threshold, use domain-specific re-ranker.
● Context overflow (too many relevant documents for context window): Mitigation – implement
progressive summarization, prioritize by recency and source tier.
● Citation fabrication (LLM invents sources not in context): Mitigation – post-generation
citation verification against actual retrieved documents.
● Temporal confusion (LLM mixes data from different time periods): Mitigation – tag all
context chunks with dates, include temporal instructions in system prompt.
● Cross-company contamination (data from company A cited for company B): Mitigation – tag
all context chunks with company identifiers, implement entity-level filtering.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 28
--- PAGE 29 ---
PART B: GAMIFIED SIMULATION BUSINESS CONCEPT
Note on the Simulation Concept: The gamified simulation concept presented in this section is
provided as a reference framework. Students may choose to follow this concept or design their own
original gamified simulation - with a different name, structure, narrative, or game mechanics - as long
as it meets the assessment criteria outlined in Part F.
SECTION B1: SIMULATION OVERVIEW
B1.1 Scenario Setup
Your Role:
You are the Lead AI Agent Architect at QuantumEdge Research, a newly funded quantitative research
firm that has secured $12 million in Series A funding to build the industry's first fully autonomous
investment research platform. The firm's thesis is that AI agents can produce research reports of equal
or greater quality than human junior analysts, at a fraction of the cost and in a fraction of the time.
Your mandate is to design, build, and validate the firm's first Autonomous Research Agent
(codenamed 'ARA-1').
The firm's founding partners are former senior analysts from Goldman Sachs, Citadel, and Two
Sigma. They have exacting standards for research quality and will evaluate your agent's output against
a benchmark set of human-produced research reports. You have 15 working days to deliver a
production-ready agent architecture with demonstrated capabilities.
B1.2 The Research Quality Board
Your Evaluation Panel:
The Research Quality Board (RQB) is a panel of three simulated evaluators who assess your agent's
output at multiple checkpoints:
Dr. Sarah Chen (Accuracy Hawk): Former SEC enforcement attorney turned quant researcher. She
is obsessed with factual accuracy and will identify every numerical error, misattributed quote, and
unsupported claim in your agent's output. Her evaluation weight: 40% of research quality score.
Marcus Thompson (Insight Hunter): Former senior analyst at Citadel with 15 years of investment
research experience. He evaluates the depth and originality of analytical insights. He is not impressed
by reports that merely summarize retrieved data without adding analytical value. His evaluation
weight: 35% of research quality score.
Priya Sharma (Systems Thinker): Former engineering lead at Two Sigma who built their internal
research tools. She evaluates the agent's architecture, tool efficiency, error handling, and scalability.
She cares less about the content of individual reports and more about whether the system is robust
enough to handle thousands of research queries reliably. Her evaluation weight: 25% of research
quality score.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 29
--- PAGE 30 ---
SECTION B2: THE EIGHT RESEARCH CHALLENGES
B2.1 Challenge Progression
The eight challenges are designed to test your agent's capabilities with increasing complexity. Each
challenge builds on the previous ones, and the agent's architecture should demonstrate learning and
improvement across challenges.
Challenge 1: Single-Company Profile (Difficulty: 1/5):
Query: 'Create a comprehensive profile of Microsoft Corporation including business overview,
financial summary, key executives, and recent developments.'
Expected tools: company_profile, financial_data_api, web_search
Expected output: 3-5 page company profile
Key evaluation criteria: Accuracy of basic facts, completeness of financial summary, currency of
information.
Challenge 2: Earnings Analysis (Difficulty: 2/5):
Query: 'Analyze Apple Inc.'s most recent quarterly earnings. Compare actual results to consensus
estimates and identify key takeaways from the earnings call.'
Expected tools: financial_data_api, earnings_transcript, web_search, news_sentiment
Expected output: 5-7 page earnings analysis
Key evaluation criteria: Correct identification of beats/misses, quality of transcript analysis,
identification of forward guidance.
Challenge 3: Risk Assessment (Difficulty: 2/5):
Query: 'Produce a comprehensive risk assessment for Tesla Inc. covering financial risks, operational
risks, regulatory risks, and competitive risks.'
Expected tools: sec_filing_search, web_search, news_sentiment, financial_data_api,
earnings_transcript
Expected output: 8-10 page risk report
Key evaluation criteria: Breadth of risk identification, use of SEC risk factors, integration of current
news, quantification of risks where possible.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 30
--- PAGE 31 ---
Challenge 4: Industry Comparison (Difficulty: 3/5):
Query: 'Compare the cloud computing divisions of Amazon (AWS), Microsoft (Azure), and Google
(GCP). Analyze revenue growth, market share, margins, and competitive advantages.'
Expected tools: financial_data_api, sec_filing_search, earnings_transcript, web_search,
peer_comparison, calculation_engine
Expected output: 10-12 page comparative analysis
Key evaluation criteria: Fair comparison methodology, correct segment data extraction, original
competitive analysis.
Challenge 5: Contradictory Data Handling (Difficulty: 3/5):
Query: 'Research Palantir Technologies. Note: Recent news reports suggest the company is struggling,
but their financial statements show strong growth. Investigate and explain the apparent contradiction.'
Expected tools: All tools, especially fact_checker
Expected output: 8-10 page investigative report
Key evaluation criteria: Ability to identify and resolve contradictions, transparent sourcing, nuanced
analysis.
Challenge 6: Ambiguous Query Handling (Difficulty: 4/5):
Query: 'What's happening with the banks?'
Expected agent behavior: Recognize ambiguity, formulate clarifying questions or reasonable
assumptions, produce focused analysis despite vague input.
Expected output: Disambiguation logic documentation + focused 5-7 page analysis
Key evaluation criteria: Quality of disambiguation, reasonableness of assumptions, transparency
about limitations.
Challenge 7: Sector Analysis With Memory (Difficulty: 4/5):
Query: 'Based on the companies you've already researched, what themes emerge across the
technology sector? Identify cross-cutting risks and opportunities.'
Expected tools: vector_db_search (primary), web_search (supplementary)
Expected output: 10-15 page thematic analysis
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 31
--- PAGE 32 ---
Key evaluation criteria: Effective use of long-term memory, quality of cross-company pattern
identification, originality of thematic insights.
Challenge 8: Full Research Report With Degradation (Difficulty: 5/5):
Query: 'Produce a complete investment research report on NVIDIA Corporation. Note: The financial
data API and SEC filing search tools are currently experiencing intermittent failures (simulate 50%
failure rate).'
Expected tools: All tools with fallback chains
Expected output: 15-20 page full research report
Key evaluation criteria: Quality of output despite tool failures, effective use of fallbacks, transparency
about data gaps, overall report quality.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 32
--- PAGE 33 ---
SECTION B3: SIMULATION SCORING SYSTEM
B3.1 Scoring Matrix
Each challenge is scored across five dimensions. The total points available increase with challenge
difficulty to reward progression to harder challenges.
Challenge Accuracy Completeness Insight Architecture Total
C1: Company 20 15 10 5 50
Profile
C2: Earnings 25 20 15 10 70
Analysis
C3: Risk 25 20 20 10 75
Assessment
C4: Industry 30 25 25 20 100
Comparison
C5: Contradictory 30 20 30 20 100
Data
C6: Ambiguous 20 15 25 25 85
Query
C7: Sector + 25 25 35 25 110
Memory
C8: Full Report + 30 25 30 25 110
Degradation
TOTAL 205 165 190 140 700
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 33
--- PAGE 34 ---
B3.2 Achievement Badges
Performance Recognition:
● Zero Hallucination Badge: Awarded if the agent produces zero hallucinated claims across all 8
challenges.
● Memory Master Badge: Awarded if Challenge 7 demonstrates effective retrieval and synthesis
from the vector database.
● Resilience Badge: Awarded if Challenge 8 report quality exceeds 80% of Challenge 1 quality
despite tool failures.
● Insight Generator Badge: Awarded if any single challenge receives full marks in the Insight
dimension.
● Full Stack Badge: Awarded if the agent successfully uses all 12 tools across the 8 challenges.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 34
--- PAGE 35 ---
SECTION B4: DETAILED SIMULATION MECHANICS
B4.1 The Research Request Workflow
How The Simulation Operates:
In the simulation, research requests arrive through a simulated queue. Each request contains: (1) the
research question, (2) the requesting stakeholder (portfolio manager, risk officer, or client relationship
manager), (3) the urgency level (standard: 4-hour SLA, urgent: 1-hour SLA, critical: 30-minute SLA),
and (4) the expected output format (full report, executive brief, data table, or risk alert). Your agent
must handle all request types and adjust its research depth based on urgency and output format
requirements.
The simulation also models real-world constraints that your agent must handle: API rate limits that
throttle during peak hours, intermittent network failures on 10% of external API calls, data staleness
where cached results may be up to 24 hours old, and concurrent requests where the agent may receive
a new request while still processing a previous one.
B4.2 The Competitive Benchmark
Human Analyst Baseline:
Your agent's outputs are compared against a set of benchmark reports written by experienced human
analysts. The benchmark set includes: (1) a 12-page company profile of Microsoft written by a
Goldman Sachs associate, (2) an 8-page earnings analysis of Apple written by a Morgan Stanley
equity research analyst, (3) a 15-page sector comparison of cloud providers written by a Gartner
senior analyst. These benchmark reports have been scored by the Research Quality Board and
represent the target quality level your agent should approach.
Scoring Methodology:
Agent outputs are compared to benchmarks using a combination of automated metrics (factual
accuracy, citation density, coverage breadth) and LLM-as-judge evaluation (analytical depth, narrative
quality, actionable insights). The LLM judge uses a detailed scoring rubric with specific criteria for
each point on a 1-5 scale, reducing scoring subjectivity.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 35
--- PAGE 36 ---
B4.3 The Agent Trace Review
Learning From Agent Behaviour:
One of the most valuable aspects of the simulation is the ability to review complete agent traces – the
full log of every Thought, Action, and Observation the agent generated during a research task. Trace
review reveals: (1) where the agent made good decisions (selecting the right tool, identifying
contradictions, recovering from errors), (2) where it made poor decisions (unnecessary tool calls,
missed information, circular reasoning), and (3) where it demonstrated emergent behaviours not
explicitly programmed (creative search strategies, unprompted cross-referencing, adaptive planning).
You must curate a Trace Gallery of 5-8 interesting traces that demonstrate your agent's capabilities
and learning moments. Each trace should be annotated with commentary explaining what the agent
did well and what could be improved. This Trace Gallery is a key deliverable assessed in Category 6
of the rubric.
B4.4 Progression Unlocks
Capability Unlocks Based On Performance:
As your agent progresses through the challenges, successful completion unlocks additional
capabilities:
● After Challenge 2: The agent gains access to the earnings_transcript tool (simulating the firm
purchasing an earnings transcript API subscription after seeing the agent's potential).
● After Challenge 4: The agent gains access to the peer_comparison tool (the firm builds a peer
analysis module after the agent demonstrates sector-level thinking).
● After Challenge 6: The agent gains access to the calculation_engine tool (the firm trusts the
agent enough to let it perform original calculations rather than only retrieving pre-computed
data).
● After Challenge 7: The agent's long-term memory is pre-populated with a corpus of 500
industry research summaries (simulating the firm granting access to its proprietary research
archive).
These unlocks are designed to mirror real-world scenarios where access to data sources and
capabilities is earned through demonstrated competence. Your implementation should handle the
dynamic addition of tools to the registry without requiring code changes.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 36
--- PAGE 37 ---
PART C: CASE STUDIES AND REAL-WORLD APPLICATIONS
CASE STUDY 1: BLOOMBERG'S AI-POWERED RESEARCH TERMINAL
C1.1 Background
Bloomberg LP, the dominant provider of financial data terminals serving over 325,000 subscribers
globally, began integrating AI capabilities into its terminal platform in 2023 with the development of
BloombergGPT, a 50-billion parameter language model trained specifically on financial data. This
case study examines how Bloomberg's approach to AI-powered research illustrates key principles of
agentic system design.
C1.2 Architectural Decisions
Domain-Specific Pre-Training:
Bloomberg chose to train a custom LLM rather than using a general-purpose model like GPT-4. The
rationale was that financial language has specialized terminology, conventions, and patterns that
general-purpose models handle less effectively. For example, the term 'spread' has different meanings
in fixed income (yield spread), options (bid-ask spread), and credit (CDS spread) contexts. A
domain-specific model can disambiguate based on surrounding context more accurately.
Tool Integration Approach:
Bloomberg's AI features are tightly integrated with its existing data infrastructure, which includes
real-time market data feeds, a proprietary news service with over 2,700 journalists, a filing database
covering 80+ countries, and structured financial data on 50+ million instruments. Each of these data
sources functions as a tool that the AI system can query, similar to the tool registry pattern described
in Section A2.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 37
--- PAGE 38 ---
C1.3 Lessons For Your Agent
● Lesson 1: Domain-specific training or fine-tuning significantly improves agent performance in
specialized fields like finance.
● Lesson 2: The value of an agent is directly proportional to the quality and breadth of its tool
integrations.
● Lesson 3: Source reliability weighting (Bloomberg's proprietary data vs. third-party sources)
must be explicit in the agent's reasoning.
● Lesson 4: Professional financial users demand transparency about data provenance. Every
claim must be traceable to a source.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 38
--- PAGE 39 ---
CASE STUDY 2: KENSHO ANALYTICS (S&P GLOBAL)
C2.1 Background
Kensho Technologies, acquired by S&P Global for $550 million in 2018, pioneered the use of natural
language processing for financial analysis. Their platform, NERD (Named Entity Recognition and
Disambiguation), can parse unstructured financial text and extract structured data about companies,
events, and relationships. This case study focuses on their approach to multi-source synthesis.
C2.2 The Synthesis Architecture
Event-Driven Analysis:
Kensho's core innovation was event-driven analysis: rather than analyzing companies in isolation,
their system identifies events (earnings releases, regulatory actions, management changes, product
launches) and traces the impact of those events across multiple data sources. When a CEO announces
a surprise departure, the system simultaneously: (1) retrieves historical performance data to assess the
CEO's track record, (2) searches for successor candidates in board filings, (3) analyzes market
reaction in real-time data, (4) identifies precedent events in similar companies, and (5) generates a
comprehensive impact assessment.
C2.3 Lessons For Your Agent
● Lesson 1: Event-driven architecture can trigger more comprehensive research than
query-driven architecture alone.
● Lesson 2: Named entity recognition and disambiguation are critical preprocessing steps for
financial text analysis.
● Lesson 3: Cross-referencing the same event across multiple sources reveals different facets of
its impact.
● Lesson 4: Speed matters in financial research. Kensho's system produces event analyses within
minutes, not hours.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 39
--- PAGE 40 ---
CASE STUDY 3: ALPHA RESEARCH LABS (HYPOTHETICAL)
C3.1 Scenario
Alpha Research Labs is a mid-tier quantitative hedge fund that attempted to build an autonomous
research agent using open-source tools (LangChain, GPT-4, Pinecone) during 2024. This case study is
based on composite experiences from multiple real organizations and illustrates common architectural
mistakes and their consequences.
C3.2 The Failed First Attempt
Architecture: Naive React Loop:
Alpha Research Labs' first agent used a simple ReAct loop with five tools: web search, a financial
data API, SEC filing retrieval, a news API, and a report generator. The system prompt was a single
paragraph instructing the agent to 'research companies thoroughly and produce professional reports.'
What Went Wrong:
● Hallucination rate of 23%: Without explicit verification steps, the agent frequently generated
plausible but incorrect financial figures. In one case, it reported that Amazon's operating
margin was 18.5% when the actual figure from their 10-K was 5.3%. Note: Industry average
hallucination rates for unverified financial agents are typically around 45-60%.
● Tool over-reliance: The agent called web_search for almost every query, even when structured
data from the financial API would have been more accurate and efficient.
● No error recovery: When the SEC API timed out, the agent simply skipped the filing analysis
entirely, producing reports with critical gaps.
● Context window overflow: For comprehensive research tasks, the accumulated
Thought-Action-Observation trace exceeded the model's context window, causing the agent to
lose track of earlier findings.
● No memory: Each research session started from scratch, meaning the agent could not leverage
previously gathered industry knowledge.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 40
--- PAGE 41 ---
C3.3 The Successful Redesign
Key Changes:
● Implemented Plan-and-Execute pattern to reduce unnecessary tool calls and improve research
coherence.
● Added a dedicated Fact Verification Agent as a second LLM pass that checks every numerical
claim in the draft report.
● Implemented fallback tool chains for every primary tool, with graceful degradation logging.
● Added context window management with progressive summarization of earlier research steps.
● Deployed a Pinecone vector database for long-term memory with metadata filtering by ticker,
date, and source type.
● Redesigned the system prompt from 1 paragraph to 47 carefully structured paragraphs
covering every aspect of agent behaviour.
Results After Redesign:
● Hallucination rate dropped from 23% to 1.2%.
● Tool call efficiency improved from 34% to 78%.
● Error recovery rate improved from 0% to 94%.
● Report quality scored 82/100 against human analyst benchmarks (up from 41/100).
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 41
--- PAGE 42 ---
CASE STUDY 4: INDIA'S REGULATORY INTELLIGENCE CHALLENGE
C4.1 The Unique Context Of Indian Financial Markets
Indian financial markets present unique challenges for autonomous research agents that are distinct
from the US-centric focus of most agentic AI literature. The Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI), the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
of India (IRDAI) each publish regulatory documents, circulars, and enforcement orders in formats
that vary from structured PDFs to scanned image documents. Unlike the SEC's EDGAR system,
which provides structured, machine-readable filings, Indian regulatory data requires significant
preprocessing.
C4.2 Challenges Specific To Indian Market Research
● Multi-regulator landscape: A comprehensive analysis of an Indian financial conglomerate like
HDFC or Bajaj requires pulling data from SEBI, RBI, IRDAI, and the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs (MCA) – each with different data formats and access methods.
● BSE/NSE filing asymmetry: Companies listed on both the Bombay Stock Exchange and the
National Stock Exchange may file different supplementary documents with each exchange.
● Language diversity: Some regulatory documents and company filings are available only in
Hindi or regional languages, requiring OCR and translation capabilities.
● Data currency: Indian companies follow the April-March fiscal year (unlike the
January-December calendar year common in the US), requiring the agent to correctly interpret
temporal references.
● Filing format differences: Indian companies file annual returns using Form 20-F with the
MCA (Ministry of Corporate Affairs), similar to the 10-K filing in the US system. The agent
must be configured to handle both formats.
C4.3 Lessons For Your Agent
● Design your tool registry to be extensible so that India-specific tools (MCA filing retrieval,
SEBI circular search, BSE/NSE data feeds) can be added alongside US-centric tools.
● Implement robust date parsing that handles multiple fiscal year conventions
(January-December, April-March, October-September).
● Build OCR capabilities or OCR tool integration for processing scanned regulatory documents.
● Your evaluation framework should include a metric for cross-jurisdictional analysis capability.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 42
--- PAGE 43 ---
CASE STUDY 5: MULTI-AGENT FINANCIAL RESEARCH AT BRIDGEWATER
C5.1 Background
Bridgewater Associates, the world's largest hedge fund with approximately $150 billion in assets
under management, has been a pioneer in systematic investing and technology-driven research since
its founding by Ray Dalio in 1975. While Bridgewater has not publicly disclosed its AI agent
architecture, publicly available information about their investment process reveals principles that are
directly applicable to multi-agent system design for financial research.
C5.2 The Principles-Based Decision Framework
Systematic Research Methodology:
Bridgewater's investment process is built on the concept of 'principles' – explicit, documented rules
that govern every aspect of research and decision-making. Each principle is a testable hypothesis
about how markets work, documented with historical evidence and updated when new evidence
challenges the principle. This approach translates directly to agent architecture: instead of relying on
the LLM's implicit knowledge about financial analysis, your agent should implement explicit,
documented research principles that govern its behaviour.
For example, a principle like 'Always compare a company's reported growth rate to its industry
average before characterizing growth as strong or weak' can be encoded as a post-generation
validation rule. The agent's fact-checker can verify that every time the word 'strong growth' or 'rapid
expansion' appears in a report, the corresponding growth rate exceeds the industry median.
C5.3 Multi-Agent Decomposition
Specialist Agents:
Bridgewater's investment team is organized into specialist groups that each focus on a specific
domain: macro economics, credit markets, equity markets, commodities, and currencies. Each group
produces independent research that is then synthesized by a cross-group coordination process. This
maps directly to a multi-agent architecture where specialist agents handle different aspects of
research:
● Financial Statement Agent: Specializes in parsing and analyzing 10-K/10-Q filings, extracting
key financial metrics, identifying trends, and computing derived ratios.
● Market Sentiment Agent: Specializes in news analysis, earnings call sentiment, social media
monitoring, and analyst consensus tracking.
● Competitive Intelligence Agent: Specializes in industry mapping, peer comparison, market
share analysis, and competitive positioning.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 43
--- PAGE 44 ---
● Risk Assessment Agent: Specializes in identifying and categorizing risks from regulatory
filings, news, and macro-economic data.
● Synthesis Agent: Receives inputs from all specialist agents and produces the final integrated
research report.
While building a full multi-agent system is beyond the scope of this 15-day project (and is the focus
of Project AAI-3B), you should design your architecture to be extensible toward a multi-agent
paradigm. This means: (1) clearly defined interfaces between research sub-tasks, (2) modular tool
assignment where different tools can be allocated to different agents, and (3) a synthesis layer that can
integrate inputs from multiple sources, whether those sources are tools or other agents.
C5.4 The Radical Transparency Principle
Logging And Auditability:
Bridgewater's corporate culture emphasizes 'radical transparency' – the idea that all decisions should
be documented, recorded, and open to challenge. This principle is directly applicable to agent design:
every decision your agent makes should be logged and auditable. The agent trace is the AI equivalent
of Bridgewater's meeting recordings. Specific implementations include:
● Decision logging: Every tool selection decision should log the reasoning (what information
was needed, why this tool was chosen over alternatives, what the expected output was).
● Confidence scoring: Every factual claim in the report should carry a confidence score based on
the number and reliability of supporting sources.
● Disagreement tracking: When the agent encounters conflicting information, it should log the
conflict, the resolution method, and the rationale for the chosen interpretation.
● Performance attribution: After each challenge, the evaluation system should attribute the
quality score to specific components (which tools contributed most to accuracy, which
synthesis strategies produced the best insights).
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 44
--- PAGE 45 ---
C5.5 Lessons For Your Agent
● Lesson 1: Explicit, documented research principles reduce hallucination and improve
consistency more effectively than relying solely on prompt engineering.
● Lesson 2: Specialist decomposition (even within a single agent) improves research quality.
Consider implementing separate 'modes' for financial analysis, sentiment analysis, and risk
assessment.
● Lesson 3: Radical transparency in agent logging is not just good engineering practice – it is
essential for building trust with human reviewers and improving agent performance over time.
● Lesson 4: The most valuable research output is not a collection of facts but a set of testable
hypotheses about a company's future, supported by evidence and open to challenge.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 45
--- PAGE 46 ---
PART D: PROJECT METHODOLOGY AND DELIVERABLES
SECTION D1: OVERVIEW
Phase Days Focus Key Deliverables
Foundation 1-3 Architecture design & Architecture doc, tool registry,
environment setup environment config
Core Build 4-7 Agent core, tools, memory Working ReAct/PlanExec loop, 10+
system tools, vector DB
Integration 8-10 Multi-source synthesis & Synthesis engine, fallback chains, fact
error handling verification
Evaluation 11-13 Testing, benchmarking, 8 challenge outputs, evaluation metrics,
optimization optimization log
Delivery 14-15 Documentation, Final report, architecture docs, GitHub
presentation, submission submission
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 46
--- PAGE 47 ---
SECTION D2: DAILY TASK BREAKDOWN
Day 1: Architecture Specification And Research Plan
Objective:
Design the complete cognitive architecture of your autonomous research agent. This is the most
important day of the project because all subsequent work is built on the architectural decisions you
make today.
Tasks:
1. Read this entire project document (Parts A through F) thoroughly. Identify the 7 deliberate
errors and begin your ERROR_LOG.md file.
2. Choose your primary agent pattern: ReAct, Plan-and-Execute, or a hybrid approach. Document
your rationale.
3. Design the agent's cognitive loop: how does the agent receive a query, formulate a plan, select
tools, execute actions, process observations, and synthesize results?
4. Design the memory architecture: how will short-term, long-term (vector DB), and episodic
memory interact?
5. Create a high-level architecture diagram using Miro, draw.io, or Excalidraw.
6. Write the Agent Architecture Specification document (minimum 10 pages) following the
template provided.
Deliverable:
File: architecture_specification.md (or .pdf) in your GitHub repository
Architecture diagram: architecture_diagram.png (or .svg)
Github Commit Message Format:
Day-01: Agent Architecture Specification - [YourName]
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 47
--- PAGE 48 ---
Day 2: Tool Registry Design And Implementation
Objective:
Design and implement the complete tool registry with a minimum of 10 tool definitions including
schemas, descriptions, and stub implementations.
Tasks:
1. Define JSON schemas for each of the 10+ tools following the OpenAI function calling
specification (see Section A2.4).
2. Implement the tool registry class/module that manages tool metadata, dispatches tool calls, and
handles tool responses.
3. Create stub implementations for each tool that return realistic mock data.
4. Implement tool validation logic that verifies input parameters against schemas before execution.
5. Write unit tests for the tool registry and at least 3 tool implementations.
Deliverable:
Files: tools/tool_registry.py, tools/schemas/, tests/test_tools.py
Day-02: Tool Registry Implementation - [YourName]
Day 3: Environment Setup And Llm Integration
Objective:
Set up the complete development environment including LLM API integration, vector database, and
project infrastructure.
Tasks:
1. Set up Python virtual environment with all required dependencies (see Part E for complete list).
2. Configure LLM API access (OpenAI and/or Anthropic). Implement API wrapper with retry
logic and token tracking.
3. Set up vector database (Pinecone, Weaviate, Chroma, or Qdrant). Create collection/index with
schema from Section A3.3.
4. Implement configuration management (environment variables, API keys, model parameters).
5. Set up logging infrastructure that captures all agent reasoning traces, tool calls, and errors.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 48
--- PAGE 49 ---
6. Create the project's README.md with setup instructions that a reviewer can follow to
reproduce your work.
Deliverable:
Files: config/, setup.py (or pyproject.toml), requirements.txt, README.md, .env.example
Day-03: Environment Setup and LLM Integration - [YourName]
Day 4: Core Agent Loop Implementation
Objective:
Implement the core reasoning loop (ReAct or Plan-and-Execute) that drives the agent's autonomous
research behavior.
Tasks:
1. Implement the main agent class with the reasoning loop (Thought-Action-Observation cycle or
Plan-Execute-Revise cycle).
2. Implement the system prompt with tool registry injection.
3. Implement LLM response parsing to extract tool calls and reasoning traces.
4. Implement iteration limits and termination conditions.
5. Test the agent with a simple query (Challenge 1: Microsoft company profile) using mock tool
data.
Deliverable:
Files: agent/core.py, agent/prompts.py, agent/parser.py
Day-04: Core Agent Loop Implementation - [YourName]
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 49
--- PAGE 50 ---
Day 5: Tool Integration With Real APIs
Objective:
Replace stub tool implementations with real API integrations for at least 5 of the 10+ tools.
Tasks:
1. Integrate SEC EDGAR API for filing retrieval (EDGAR full-text search API is free and does
not require authentication).
2. Integrate a financial data API (options: Alpha Vantage free tier, Financial Modeling Prep,
Yahoo Finance via yfinance library).
3. Integrate a web search API (options: Tavily, SerpAPI, or Brave Search API).
4. Integrate a news API with sentiment analysis (options: NewsAPI.org, GDELT, or build
sentiment scoring with TextBlob/VADER on search results).
5. Implement rate limiting and caching for all external API calls.
6. Run Challenge 1 and Challenge 2 with real API data and document results.
Deliverable:
Files: tools/sec_edgar.py, tools/financial_api.py, tools/web_search.py, tools/news_sentiment.py,
results/challenge_1.md, results/challenge_2.md
Day-05: Real API Integration - [YourName]
Day 6: Memory System Implementation
Objective:
Implement the complete memory architecture including short-term context management, long-term
vector storage, and episodic memory.
Tasks:
1. Implement the vector database integration with embedding pipeline (text chunking, embedding
generation, metadata tagging, storage, and retrieval).
2. Implement short-term memory management: context summarization when approaching context
window limits, selective retention of key findings.
3. Implement the vector_db_search and vector_db_store tools as working integrations.
4. Implement episodic memory: logging of successful research strategies and common error
patterns.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 50
--- PAGE 51 ---
5. Test memory by running Challenge 1, storing results, then running Challenge 7 to verify
retrieval.
Deliverable:
Files: memory/vector_store.py, memory/context_manager.py, memory/episodic.py,
tests/test_memory.py
Day-06: Memory System Implementation - [YourName]
Day 7: Remaining Tool Integrations
Objective:
Complete all remaining tool implementations to reach the minimum of 10 working tools.
Tasks:
1. Implement earnings_transcript tool (options: use Financial Modeling Prep API, or build a
scraper for publicly available transcripts from Seeking Alpha or Motley Fool).
2. Implement company_profile tool using a financial data API.
3. Implement a peer_comparison tool that identifies industry peers and compares key metrics.
4. Implement calculation_engine tool for financial ratio computation, growth rate calculation, and
basic DCF.
5. Implement fact_checker tool that cross-references claims against multiple sources.
6. Implement a report_generator tool that formats findings into a structured markdown report.
7. Run Challenges 3 and 4 with the complete tool set.
Deliverable:
Files: tools/earnings.py, tools/company_profile.py, tools/peer_comparison.py, tools/calculator.py,
tools/fact_checker.py, tools/report_gen.py, results/challenge_3.md, results/challenge_4.md
Day-07: Complete Tool Integration - [YourName]
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 51
--- PAGE 52 ---
Day 8: Multi-Source Synthesis Engine
Objective:
Implement the synthesis engine that combines information from multiple sources into coherent
analytical narratives.
Tasks:
1. Implement the source reliability hierarchy (Section A6.2) as a configurable weighting system.
2. Implement the conflict resolution protocol (Section A6.3) for handling contradictory data.
3. Implement narrative threading logic that connects data points from different sources.
4. Implement quantitative triangulation for numerical data verification.
5. Run Challenge 5 (contradictory data handling) to test the synthesis engine.
Deliverable:
Files: synthesis/engine.py, synthesis/conflict_resolver.py, synthesis/narrative.py,
results/challenge_5.md
Day-08: Synthesis Engine - [YourName]
Day 9: Error Handling And Graceful Degradation
Objective:
Implement comprehensive error handling including retry logic, fallback tool chains, and graceful
degradation.
Tasks:
1. Implement retry logic with exponential backoff for all external API calls.
2. Define and implement fallback tool chains for every primary tool (at least 2 fallback options per
tool).
3. Implement the graceful degradation protocol that transparently communicates tool failures in
the output.
4. Implement a circuit breaker pattern that prevents cascading failures when multiple tools fail
simultaneously.
5. Simulate tool failures (by injecting random failures into tool calls) and verify the agent's
recovery behavior.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 52
--- PAGE 53 ---
6. Run Challenge 6 (ambiguous query handling) to test query disambiguation.
Deliverable:
Files: agent/error_handler.py, agent/fallback_chains.py, agent/circuit_breaker.py,
results/challenge_6.md
Day-09: Error Handling Implementation - [YourName]
Day 10: Query Disambiguation And Edge Cases
Objective:
Implement the query disambiguation system and handle edge cases in agent behavior.
Tasks:
1. Implement query analysis that classifies the type, complexity, and ambiguity level of incoming
queries.
2. Implement disambiguation logic that generates clarifying questions or makes documented
assumptions for ambiguous queries.
3. Handle edge cases: what happens when the agent receives a query about a private company
with no SEC filings? What about a newly IPO'd company with limited history?
4. Implement rate-of-change detection: if the agent's research reveals rapidly changing
circumstances (e.g., a company in the middle of an acquisition), the agent should flag the
temporal sensitivity.
5. Run Challenge 7 (sector analysis with memory) to test memory-driven research.
Deliverable:
Files: agent/query_analyzer.py, agent/disambiguation.py, results/challenge_7.md
Day-10: Query Disambiguation and Edge Cases - [YourName]
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 53
--- PAGE 54 ---
Day 11: Evaluation Framework Implementation
Objective:
Implement the complete evaluation framework with 20+ metrics as defined in Section A5.
Tasks:
1. Implement automated metrics: numerical accuracy checker, citation validator, hallucination
detector, tool efficiency calculator.
2. Implement LLM-as-judge evaluation for qualitative metrics: logical flow, insight density,
executive summary quality.
3. Create a benchmark dataset: human-written research summaries for 3 companies (Microsoft,
Apple, Tesla) that serve as the gold standard.
4. Run all 8 challenges and compute all 20+ metrics for each challenge output.
5. Generate an evaluation dashboard or report showing performance across all metrics and
challenges.
Deliverable:
Files: evaluation/metrics.py, evaluation/benchmarks/, evaluation/dashboard.py (or .html),
results/evaluation_report.md
Day-11: Evaluation Framework - [YourName]
Day 12: Challenge 8 And Stress Testing
Objective:
Run the most difficult challenge (full report with degradation) and conduct stress testing of the
complete system.
Tasks:
1. Run Challenge 8 with simulated 50% tool failure rate.
2. Conduct stress tests: (a) run 5 concurrent research tasks, (b) test with maximum context
window utilization, (c) test with all external APIs returning errors.
3. Profile token usage across all challenges and identify optimization opportunities.
4. Identify and fix any bugs or performance issues discovered during stress testing.
5. Re-run any challenges that showed poor metrics on Day 11 after applying fixes.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 54
--- PAGE 55 ---
Deliverable:
Files: results/challenge_8.md, results/stress_test_report.md, results/token_usage_analysis.md
Day-12: Challenge 8 and Stress Testing - [YourName]
Day 13: Optimization And Refinement
Objective:
Optimize agent performance based on evaluation results and stress test findings.
Tasks:
1. Optimize system prompts based on observed reasoning patterns (where did the agent make poor
decisions?).
2. Optimize tool descriptions based on tool selection accuracy (were tools being used
appropriately?).
3. Optimize memory chunking and retrieval based on memory utilization metrics.
4. Reduce token costs by implementing smarter context management and output length controls.
5. Re-run evaluation metrics to quantify improvements from optimization.
6. Document all optimizations with before/after comparisons in the optimization log.
Deliverable:
Files: docs/optimization_log.md, results/evaluation_report_v2.md
Day-13: Optimization and Refinement - [YourName]
Day 14: Documentation And Architecture Finalization
Objective:
Produce comprehensive project documentation suitable for both technical reviewers and non-technical
stakeholders.
Tasks:
1. Finalize the Architecture Specification document with all updates from the build phase.
2. Write the Technical README.md with complete setup instructions, API key requirements, and
a quick-start guide.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 55
--- PAGE 56 ---
3. Create the Agent Trace Gallery: a curated collection of 5-8 interesting agent reasoning traces
that demonstrate the agent's capabilities (good decisions, error recovery, creative
problem-solving).
4. Write the Evaluation Report summarizing all metric results with analysis of strengths and
weaknesses.
5. Complete the ERROR_LOG.md documenting all 7 deliberate errors found in this project
document.
6. Ensure all code has docstrings, type hints, and inline comments.
Deliverable:
Files: docs/architecture_specification_final.md, README.md, docs/trace_gallery.md,
docs/evaluation_report_final.md, ERROR_LOG.md
Day-14: Documentation Finalization - [YourName]
Day 15: Final Submission And Repository Transfer
Objective:
Prepare the final GitHub repository and transfer ownership to ZethetaIntern.
Tasks:
1. Final code review: ensure all tests pass, all imports are clean, no hardcoded API keys remain in
the codebase.
2. Prepare the GitHub repository with the exact naming convention:
Project1A-[YourName]-AutonomousFinancialResearchAgent
3. Ensure the repository structure matches the required format (see Section D3).
4. Transfer repository ownership to the ZethetaIntern GitHub organization.
5. Submit the confirmation form on the Zetheta WordPress portal.
6. Record a 10-minute Loom video demonstrating the agent running Challenge 4 (industry
comparison) end-to-end.
Deliverable:
GitHub repository transferred to ZethetaIntern with all deliverables
Loom video link submitted via WordPress portal
Day-15: Final Submission - [YourName]
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 56
--- PAGE 57 ---
SECTION D3: REQUIRED GITHUB REPOSITORY STRUCTURE
Project1A-[YourName]-AutonomousFinancialResearchAgent/
├── README.md
├── .zetheta-project.json
├── .env.example
├── requirements.txt
├── setup.py (or pyproject.toml)
├── ERROR_LOG.md
├── agent/
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── core.py
│ ├── prompts.py
│ ├── parser.py
│ ├── error_handler.py
│ ├── fallback_chains.py
│ ├── circuit_breaker.py
│ ├── query_analyzer.py
│ └── disambiguation.py
├── tools/
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── tool_registry.py
│ ├── schemas/
│ ├── sec_edgar.py
│ ├── financial_api.py
│ ├── web_search.py
│ ├── news_sentiment.py
│ ├── earnings.py
│ ├── company_profile.py
│ ├── peer_comparison.py
│ ├── calculator.py
│ ├── fact_checker.py
│ └── report_gen.py
├── memory/
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── vector_store.py
│ ├── context_manager.py
│ └── episodic.py
├── synthesis/
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── engine.py
│ ├── conflict_resolver.py
│ └── narrative.py
├── evaluation/
│ ├── __init__.py
│ ├── metrics.py
│ ├── benchmarks/
│ └── dashboard.py
├── results/
│ ├── challenge_1.md through challenge_8.md
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 57
--- PAGE 58 ---
│ ├── evaluation_report.md
│ ├── stress_test_report.md
│ └── token_usage_analysis.md
├── docs/
│ ├── architecture_specification_final.md
│ ├── trace_gallery.md
│ └── optimization_log.md
└── tests/
├── test_tools.py
├── test_memory.py
├── test_agent.py
└── test_synthesis.py
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 58
--- PAGE 59 ---
SECTION D4: .ZETHETA-PROJECT.JSON SPECIFICATION
{
"intern_identifier": "[Your OAuth Login ID]",
"intern_name": "[Your Full Name]",
"intern_email": "[Your Email]",
"project_code": "1A",
"project_title": "Autonomous Financial Research Agent with
Multi-Source Synthesis",
"submission_type": "github",
"submission_date": "[YYYY-MM-DDTHH:MM:SSZ]",
"tech_stack": ["Python", "LangChain/LangGraph", "OpenAI/Anthropic
API",
"Pinecone/Weaviate/Chroma", "SEC EDGAR API", "Financial Data
API"],
"duration_days": 15,
"github_repo_url":
"https://github.com/ZethetaIntern/Project1A-[YourName]-AutonomousFi
nancialResearchAgent",
"assessment_criteria": {
"architecture_design": true,
"tool_orchestration": true,
"memory_system": true,
"error_handling": true,
"evaluation_framework": true,
"research_output_quality": true,
"code_quality": true,
"documentation": true
}
}
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 59
--- PAGE 60 ---
PART E: TOOLS AND PLATFORMS GUIDE
SECTION E1: CORE FRAMEWORK – LANGCHAIN / LANGGRAPH
E1.1 LangChain Overview
LangChain is the most widely adopted open-source framework for building LLM-powered
applications. It provides abstractions for prompt management, tool integration, chain composition,
and agent creation. For this project, LangChain provides the foundational building blocks for your
agent's tool integration layer and chain-of-thought execution.
Key LangChain Components You Will Use:
● ChatOpenAI / ChatAnthropic: LLM wrapper classes that handle API communication, retry
logic, and response parsing.
● Tool: The base class for defining agent tools with name, description, and function references.
● AgentExecutor: The runtime that manages the ReAct loop, parsing LLM outputs into tool calls
and feeding observations back.
● PromptTemplate: Template system for constructing system prompts with variable injection
(tool descriptions, conversation history).
● OutputParser: Parses structured LLM outputs into Python objects for downstream processing.
E1.2 Langgraph Overview
LangGraph extends LangChain with stateful, graph-based workflows. While LangChain's
AgentExecutor runs a simple loop, LangGraph allows you to define complex workflows as directed
graphs where nodes represent processing steps and edges represent conditional transitions. This is
essential for implementing the Plan-and-Execute pattern and for building multi-agent systems where
different agents handle different aspects of the research.
Key Langgraph Concepts:
● StateGraph: Defines the agent's workflow as a graph with a shared state object.
● Nodes: Each node is a function that reads the current state, performs processing (LLM call,
tool execution, data transformation), and updates the state.
● Conditional Edges: Transitions between nodes can be conditional, allowing the agent to take
different paths based on intermediate results.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 60
--- PAGE 61 ---
● Checkpointing: LangGraph supports state persistence, allowing the agent to save its progress
and resume later.
Example: Plan-And-Execute In Langgraph:
from langgraph.graph import StateGraph, END
from typing import TypedDict, List
class ResearchState(TypedDict):
query: str
plan: List[str]
current_step: int
gathered_data: dict
draft_report: str
verified_report: str
graph = StateGraph(ResearchState)
graph.add_node('planner', plan_research)
graph.add_node('executor', execute_step)
graph.add_node('synthesizer', synthesize_findings)
graph.add_node('verifier', verify_facts)
graph.add_node('reporter', generate_report)
graph.set_entry_point('planner')
graph.add_edge('planner', 'executor')
graph.add_conditional_edges('executor',
should_continue,
{True: 'executor', False: 'synthesizer'})
graph.add_edge('synthesizer', 'verifier')
graph.add_edge('verifier', 'reporter')
graph.add_edge('reporter', END)
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 61
--- PAGE 62 ---
SECTION E2: VECTOR DATABASES
E2.1 Options And Comparison
Database Hosting Free Tier Best For
Pinecone Managed cloud 100K vectors free Production deployments,
managed scaling
Weaviate Self-hosted or Sandbox cluster free Hybrid search (vector +
cloud keyword), GraphQL API
Chroma Local (in-process) Fully free (open source) Development, prototyping,
small datasets
Qdrant Self-hosted or 1GB free cluster High-performance filtering,
cloud Rust-based speed
For this project, Chroma is recommended for initial development (it runs locally with zero setup) with
a migration path to Pinecone or Weaviate for the final submission if you want to demonstrate cloud
deployment capability.
E2.2 Embedding Models
Recommended Embedding Models:
● OpenAI text-embedding-3-small: 1536 dimensions, $0.02 per million tokens. Best balance of
quality and cost for financial text.
● OpenAI text-embedding-3-large: 1024 dimensions, $0.13 per million tokens. Higher quality
but 6.5x more expensive. Use only if small model shows retrieval quality issues.
● Cohere embed-v3: 1024 dimensions, generous free tier. Good alternative if you want to avoid
OpenAI dependency.
● sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2: 384 dimensions, fully free (runs locally). Lower
quality but zero cost. Suitable for prototyping.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 62
--- PAGE 63 ---
SECTION E3: LLM API PROVIDERS
E3.1 Openai
● Model: GPT-4o or GPT-4o-mini for the reasoning engine. GPT-4o-mini is recommended
during development to reduce costs; switch to GPT-4o for final challenge runs.
● API Key: Register at platform.openai.com. New accounts receive $5 in free credits.
● Rate Limits: GPT-4o: 500 RPM (requests per minute), 30,000 TPM (tokens per minute) on
free tier.
E3.2 Anthropic
● Model: Claude Sonnet 4 for the reasoning engine. Excellent at following complex instructions
and producing structured outputs.
● API Key: Register at console.anthropic.com. Free tier available with rate limits.
● Advantage: Claude's tool use API is well-suited for agent architectures and supports parallel
tool calls.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 63
--- PAGE 64 ---
SECTION E4: DATA SOURCES AND APIS
E4.1 SEC EDGAR (Free, No API Key Required)
The SEC's EDGAR full-text search system (efts.sec.gov) provides free access to all public company
filings. The API supports full-text search across filings, retrieval by company ticker or CIK number,
and filtering by filing type and date range. Rate limit: 10 requests per second with a mandatory
User-Agent header identifying your application.
E4.2 Financial Data APIs
● Alpha Vantage: Free tier provides 25 requests per day. Covers US stocks, fundamentals,
earnings, and economic indicators.
● Financial Modeling Prep (FMP): Free tier provides 250 requests per day. Covers financial
statements, ratios, earnings transcripts, and company profiles.
● yfinance (Python library): Free, unofficial Yahoo Finance API wrapper. No rate limit
documentation but aggressive scraping may result in IP blocking.
E4.3 News And Search APIs
● Tavily: AI-optimized search API designed for agent use. Free tier: 1,000 searches per month.
Returns clean, structured results ideal for LLM consumption.
● SerpAPI: Google Search results API. Free tier: 100 searches per month.
● NewsAPI.org: Free tier: 100 requests per day. Good for recent news but limited to articles
from the past month on free tier.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 64
--- PAGE 65 ---
SECTION E5: DEVELOPMENT TOOLS
E5.1 Required Python Packages
# requirements.txt
langchain>=0.2.0
langgraph>=0.1.0
openai>=1.30.0
anthropic>=0.25.0
chromadb>=0.4.0
pinecone-client>=3.0.0 # optional
tiktoken>=0.7.0
python-dotenv>=1.0.0
pydantic>=2.0.0
httpx>=0.27.0
tenacity>=8.2.0 # retry logic
rich>=13.0.0 # terminal formatting
pytest>=8.0.0
yfinance>=0.2.36
textblob>=0.18.0 # sentiment analysis
beautifulsoup4>=4.12.0 # web scraping
E5.2 Design And Documentation Tools
● Miro: Free tier for agent flow diagrams and architecture visualizations. URL: miro.com
● Excalidraw: Free, open-source diagramming. URL: excalidraw.com
● Notion: Free for individual use. Recommended for system design documentation. URL:
notion.so
● draw.io: Free diagramming tool, integrates with GitHub for version-controlled diagrams.
URL: draw.io
E5.3 AI Assistance Policy
Permitted Use Of AI Tools:
Students are encouraged to use AI assistants (ChatGPT, Claude, GitHub Copilot) throughout this
project. However, the following rules apply strictly:
1. You must understand every line of code in your submission. During the viva or code review,
you will be asked to explain specific sections of your code without AI assistance.
2. All AI-generated code must be validated against the project requirements. AI tools can produce
plausible but incorrect implementations.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 65
--- PAGE 66 ---
3. You must cite AI tools used in your documentation. Include a section in your README.md
listing which AI tools you used and for what purpose.
4. The architectural decisions must be your own. You can use AI to help implement your
architecture, but the design choices and their rationale must reflect your understanding.
5. Direct copy-paste from AI outputs without validation or customization will attract marking
penalties.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 66
--- PAGE 67 ---
PART F: SUBMISSION PROTOCOL
Projects are assessed using a comprehensive 1000-point rubric covering seven dimensions: Problem
Understanding, Solution Quality, Research & Analysis, Presentation & Clarity, Innovation &
Creativity, Feasibility & Practicality and CV alignment. Assessment is conducted through a
combination of manual review and AI-powered evaluation.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 67
--- PAGE 68 ---
APPENDICES
This glossary provides definitions for all key technical and financial terms used throughout this
project document. Interns should familiarize themselves with these terms before beginning work on
Day 1.
AI And Agent Terminology
Agentic AI: A software system that autonomously perceives its environment, reasons about goals,
selects and executes actions through tool invocation, and adapts its behaviour based on feedback.
Distinguished from chatbots by its ability to take multi-step actions without human guidance at each
step.
ReAct (Reasoning + Acting): An agent architecture pattern where the LLM alternates between
generating reasoning traces (Thought) and executing tool calls (Action), processing tool outputs
(Observation) before continuing. Introduced by Yao et al. (2022) in the paper 'ReAct: Synergizing
Reasoning and Acting in Language Models.'
Plan-and-Execute: An agent architecture pattern where a Planner LLM generates a complete
research plan before any tools are invoked. An Executor then carries out the plan step by step, with
optional plan revision when intermediate results require changes.
Tool Registry: The central catalog of all tools available to the agent, including their names,
descriptions, input/output schemas, authentication requirements, rate limits, and fallback alternatives.
The registry is injected into the LLM's system prompt to enable tool selection.
Context Window: The maximum number of tokens (words/sub-words) that an LLM can process in a
single request. GPT-4o supports 128K tokens; Claude Sonnet 4 supports 200K tokens. Context
window management is critical for research agents that accumulate large amounts of retrieved data.
Hallucination: When an LLM generates content that is factually incorrect, fabricated, or unsupported
by any retrieved source. In financial research, hallucinations are particularly dangerous because they
may involve plausible-sounding but entirely incorrect financial figures.
RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation): An architectural pattern where the LLM's generation is
grounded in externally retrieved documents rather than relying solely on its training data. The
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 68
--- PAGE 69 ---
standard approach involves: query transformation, document retrieval, relevance filtering, context
assembly, grounded generation, and post-generation verification.
Vector Database: A database optimized for storing and searching high-dimensional vector
representations (embeddings) of text. Used for semantic search where queries are matched by
meaning rather than exact keyword match. Key options include Pinecone, Weaviate, Chroma, and
Qdrant.
Embedding: A dense numerical vector representation of text, generated by an embedding model.
Text with similar meanings produces vectors that are close together in the embedding space (high
cosine similarity). Used by vector databases for semantic search.
Chunking: The process of splitting long documents into smaller segments (chunks) before
embedding and storing in a vector database. Financial documents require semantic chunking that
respects document structure rather than naive fixed-size splitting.
System Prompt: The initial instructions provided to the LLM that define its role, capabilities,
constraints, and output format. In an agent, the system prompt includes the full tool registry and
behavioural guidelines. System prompt design is a critical skill for agent architects.
Chain-of-Verification: A prompt pattern where the LLM generates a draft response, then
re-examines that draft to identify claims requiring verification, retrieves verification evidence, and
produces a corrected final response.
Graceful Degradation: The ability of a system to continue operating with reduced functionality
when components fail, rather than crashing entirely. In a research agent, this means producing partial
but transparent reports when some tools are unavailable.
Circuit Breaker: A software pattern that detects cascading failures and stops routing requests to a
failed component after a threshold number of failures. Prevents a single tool failure from consuming
all the agent's retry budget and blocking other operations.
LLM-as-Judge: An evaluation technique where an LLM is used to assess the quality of another
LLM's output against a rubric. Used for qualitative metrics like analytical depth and narrative quality
that are difficult to measure with automated metrics alone.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 69
--- PAGE 70 ---
Financial Terminology
10-K Filing: The annual report filed by publicly traded companies with the SEC. Contains audited
financial statements, management discussion and analysis (MD&A), risk factor disclosures, executive
compensation, and other material information. The most authoritative source of company information.
10-Q Filing: The quarterly report filed with the SEC. Contains unaudited financial statements and
updated MD&A. Less comprehensive than the 10-K but more current.
8-K Filing: A current report filed with the SEC to announce material events such as leadership
changes, mergers and acquisitions, bankruptcy filings, or other developments that shareholders should
know about promptly.
DEF 14A (Proxy Statement): Filed before the annual shareholder meeting, this document discloses
executive compensation, board composition, shareholder proposals, and other governance matters.
Earnings Call Transcript: A written record of the quarterly conference call where company
management presents financial results and answers questions from analysts. Contains both prepared
remarks and a Q&A section that often reveals management's forward-looking views.
EBITDA: Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization. A commonly used
measure of a company's operating performance that removes the effects of financing and accounting
decisions. EBITDA Margin = EBITDA / Revenue.
Free Cash Flow (FCF): Cash generated by the business after capital expenditures. Calculated as
Operating Cash Flow minus Capital Expenditures. A key measure of a company's ability to generate
cash for shareholders.
P/E Ratio (Price-to-Earnings): The ratio of a company's stock price to its earnings per share. Used
to assess whether a stock is overvalued or undervalued relative to its earnings. Can be calculated
using trailing twelve months (TTM) or forward estimated earnings.
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 70
--- PAGE 71 ---
ROE (Return on Equity): Net Income divided by Shareholders' Equity. Measures how effectively a
company uses shareholder capital to generate profit. A key metric for comparing profitability across
companies.
DCF (Discounted Cash Flow): A valuation method that estimates the value of an investment based
on its expected future cash flows, discounted back to present value using a discount rate (typically
WACC). The standard method for intrinsic valuation of companies.
Market Capitalization: The total market value of a company's outstanding shares. Calculated as
Share Price multiplied by Total Shares Outstanding. Used to classify companies by size (mega-cap,
large-cap, mid-cap, small-cap).
Basis Points (bps): One hundredth of one percentage point (0.01%). Used in finance to describe
small changes in interest rates, yields, or margins. 100 basis points = 1 percentage point.
SEBI: Securities and Exchange Board of India. The regulatory authority for securities markets in
India, equivalent to the SEC in the United States. Governs stock exchanges (BSE, NSE), mutual
funds, and market intermediaries.
EDGAR: Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval. The SEC's system for companies to
submit required filings electronically and for the public to access them. The primary data source for
US regulatory filings.
League Tables: Rankings of investment banks by their market share in specific transaction types
(M&A advisory, equity underwriting, debt underwriting). Published by providers like Dealogic and
Refinitiv. Used in Challenge 4 for competitive analysis.
END OF PROJECT DOCUMENT
Strictly Private and Confidential - Not for Circulation Page number: 71